Look at this evidence bench for a second. Pencil. Water.
Spoon. Salt. A copper coin. Even the air you just breathed
out.
They could not look more different. One writes, one flows,
one clinks, and one sits there pretending to be a tiny
shiny medal.
And the salt? Stir it into water and it seems to vanish.
It has not vanished. It is hiding in plain sight.
Chemistry starts with one brilliant idea: none of this is
magic. It is all built from pieces so small your eyes will
never win that argument.
Chemists use models because we cannot directly see that
tiny world. A model is not a photograph. It is a thinking
tool, like a map.
A useful model does not show every detail. It shows the
detail we need for the question. If the question is about
sorting matter, the model should show what particles are
One important tiny unit is an atom. Atoms are the basic
characters in the chemistry alphabet.
An element is matter made from one type of atom. Pure gold
has gold atoms. Pure copper has copper atoms. The graphite
in a pencil contains carbon atoms.
Atoms can join together as units called molecules. Oxygen
gas is a useful trick case: it is a molecule because
oxygen atoms are joined in pairs, and it is still an
When different elements are chemically joined, we call the
substance a compound. Water is a compound. Table salt is a
compound too, but it is not a neat little salt molecule;
A mixture is different. In a mixture, substances are
together, but they have not been rebuilt into one new
substance. Air is a mixture. Salt water is a mixture.
Now sort three examples. Copper coin: one type of atom, so
element. Water: hydrogen and oxygen chemically joined, so
compound. Salt water: water and salt together, so mixture.
The words can overlap in careful ways. Water is a molecule
and a compound. Oxygen gas is a molecule and an element.
That is not a mistake; the words answer different
Molecule asks: are atoms joined as a unit? Element asks:
is there only one type of atom? Compound asks: are
different elements chemically joined? Mixture asks: are
Here is a tiny exam-style trap. A thing can fit more than
one word. Oxygen gas is an element and a molecule. Water
is a molecule and a compound. But air is not a compound,
Another trap: do not call every tiny dot an atom. Salt
water has water molecules and dissolved salt particles.
The model is allowed to be simple, but our words still
So here is the first chemist move. Ask: what is it made
from, and are the pieces joined or just together?
Today we start the code: atoms, elements, molecules,
compounds, and mixtures.